Information on what to monitor for Redpanda (#1059)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/manage/monitoring.mdx

- Redpanda is designed with a [thread-per-core model](../../get-started/architecture#raft-consensus-algorithm) that it implements with the Seastar library. With each application thread pinned to a CPU core, when observing or analyzing the behavior of a specific application, monitor the relevant metrics with the label for the specific CPU core ("shard"), if available.

### Infrastructure resources

The underlying infrastructure of your system should have sufficient margins to handle peaks in processing, storage, and I/O loads. Monitor infrastructure health with the following queries.

#### CPU usage

For the total CPU uptime, monitor [redpanda_uptime_seconds_total](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_uptime_seconds_total) and [redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total):

```
rate(redpanda_uptime_seconds_total[5m])

> rate(redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total[5m])

Author: @VladLazar - `redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total` itself is the total busy (non-idle) time, right? So you're suggesting querying busy_time / uptime to get the percentage in use?

> rate(redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total[5m])

Reviewer: Not quite. `redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total` is a monotonic counter that tracks how many seconds the core that a specific shard is pinned to was busy for. The rate of change (or derivative) tells you what percentage of that shard was in use at a given point in time.

### Consumers

#### Consumer group lag

When working with Kafka consumer groups, the consumer group lag&mdash;the difference between the broker's latest (max) offset and the group's last committed offset&mdash;is a performance indicator of how fresh the data being consumed is. While higher lag for archival consumers is expected, high lag for real-time consumers could indicate that the consumers are overloaded and thus may need their topics to be partitioned more, or to spread the load to more consumers.   

To monitor consumer group lag, create a query with the [redpanda_kafka_max_offset](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_max_offset) and [redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset](redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset) gauges:

```

> max by(redpanda_namespace, redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition)(redpanda_kafka_max_offset{redpanda_namespace="kafka"}) - on(redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition) group_right max by(redpanda_group, redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition)(redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset)

Reviewer: @tmgstevens I recall you were looking into consumer lag metrics. Does this look right to you?

Author: @tmgstevens I'll be merging this PR by EOB tomorrow, Tue Jan 31, please review here or if needed resolve it in a subsequent issue.

---
title: Monitor Redpanda
---

<head>
  <meta name="title" content="Monitor Redpanda | Redpanda Docs" />
  <meta
    name="description"
    content="Metrics to monitor the health of your system to predict issues and optimize performance."
  />
</head>

import Aliases from "@site/docs/shared/_aliases.mdx";
import MetricsUsageTip from '@site/docs/shared/_metrics-usage-tip.mdx';

Redpanda exports metrics through Prometheus endpoints for you to monitor system health and optimize system performance.

A Redpanda node exports public metrics from the [/public_metrics](../../reference/public-metrics-reference) endpoint through the Admin API port (default: 9644).

> Before v22.2, a Redpanda node provided metrics only through the [/metrics](../../reference/internal-metrics-reference) endpoint through the Admin API port. While Redpanda still provides this endpoint, it includes many internal metrics that are unnecessary for a typical Redpanda user to monitor. Consequently, the `/public_metrics` endpoint was added to provide a smaller set of important metrics that can queried and ingested more quickly and inexpensively. The `/metrics` endpoint is now referred to as the 'internal metrics' endpoint, and Redpanda recommends it to be used for development, testing, and analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before v22.2, a Redpanda node provided metrics only through the [/metrics](../../reference/internal-metrics-reference) endpoint through the Admin API port. While Redpanda still provides this endpoint, it includes many internal metrics that are unnecessary for a typical Redpanda user to monitor. Consequently, the `/public_metrics` endpoint was added to provide a smaller set of important metrics that can queried and ingested more quickly and inexpensively. The `/metrics` endpoint is now referred to as the 'internal metrics' endpoint, and Redpanda recommends that you use it for development, testing, and analysis.
```

<MetricsUsageTip/>

:::note

> To maximize monitoring performance by minimizing the cardinality of data, metrics are exported when their underlying features are in use, and are not exported when not in use. For example, a metric for consumer groups, [redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset), is not exported when no groups are registered.

Reviewer 2: Odd that the link in the note renders gray and not red. It's more difficult to discern that it is a link.

When monitoring internal metrics, consider enabling [aggregate_metrics](../reference/cluster-properties#aggregate_metrics) to reduce the cardinality of data to monitor.
:::

> The rest of this topic covers the following about monitoring Redpanda metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This topic covers the following about monitoring Redpanda metrics:
```

- [Configure Prometheus to monitor Redpanda metrics](#configure-prometheus)

> - [Generate a Grafana dashboard](#generate-grafana-dashboard)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Generate Grafana dashboard](#generate-grafana-dashboard)
```

Edited so the link matches the heading

- [Learn from examples in the Redpanda monitoring examples repository](#use-redpanda-monitoring-examples)
- [Metrics and queries to monitor for system performance and health](#monitor-for-performance-and-health)
- [References of public and internal metrics](#references) 

## Configure Prometheus

[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is a system monitoring and alerting tool. It collects and stores metrics as time-series data identified by a metric name and key/value pairs.

> To configure and use Prometheus monitor Redpanda metrics, follow these steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure and use Prometheus to monitor Redpanda metrics:
```

> :::note

Reviewer 2: The note interrupts the flow from the intro to the steps and the actual steps. Maybe put it before the intro?

Redpanda supports generating Grafana dashboards from its metrics endpoints with `rpk generate grafana-dashboard`.

To generate a comprehensive Grafana dashboard, run the following command and pipe the output to a file that can be imported into Grafana:

```
rpk generate grafana-dashboard --datasource <name> --metrics-endpoint <url> > <output-file>
```

- `<name>` is the name of the Prometheus data source configured in your Grafana instance.
- `<url>` is the address to a Redpanda node's metrics endpoint (public or internal).
    
- For `/public_metrics`, for example, run the following command: 

    ```
    rpk generate grafana-dashboard \
    --datasource prometheus \
    --metrics-endpoint <node-addr>:9644/public_metrics> redpanda-dashboard.json 
    ```

- For `/metrics`, for example, run the following command: 

    ```
    rpk generate grafana-dashboard \
    --datasource prometheus \
    --metrics-endpoint <node-addr>:9644/metrics> redpanda-dashboard.json 
    ```

For details about the command, refer to the [rpk generate grafana-dashboard](../reference/rpk/rpk-generate/rpk-generate-grafana-dashboard.mdx) reference.

> In Grafana, import the generated JSON file to create a dashboard. Out of the box, Grafana generates panels tracking latency for 50%, 95%, and 99% (based on the maximum latency set), throughput, and error segmentation by type.

Reviewer 2: For the five items listed here, perhaps consider a list?

> You can use the imported dashboard to create new panels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the imported dashboard to create new panels:
```

## Monitor for performance and health

This section provides guidelines and example queries using Redpanda's public metrics to optimize your system's performance and to monitor its health.

:::tip
To help detect and mitigate anomalous system behaviors, capture baseline metrics of your healthy system at different stages (at start-up, under high load, in steady state) so you can set thresholds and alerts according to those baselines.
:::

### Redpanda architecture

Understanding the following unique aspects about Redpanda's architecture and data path will improve your performance debugging and tuning skills:

- Redpanda replicates partitions across nodes in a cluster by using the [Raft consensus protocol](../../get-started/architecture#raft-consensus-algorithm), where each partition is a Raft consensus group. A message written from the Kafka API flows down to the Raft implementation layer that eventually directs it to a node to be stored. Observing metrics about the Raft layer thus can reveal the health of partitions and data flowing within Redpanda.

> - Redpanda is designed with a [thread-per-core model](../../get-started/architecture#raft-consensus-algorithm) that it implements with the Seastar library. With each application thread pinned to a CPU core, when observing or analyzing the behavior of a specific application, monitor the relevant metrics with the label for the specific CPU core ('shard'), if available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Redpanda is designed with a [thread-per-core model](../../get-started/architecture#raft-consensus-algorithm) that it implements with the Seastar library. With each application thread pinned to a CPU core, when observing or analyzing the behavior of a specific application, monitor the relevant metrics with the label for the specific CPU core ("shard"), if available.
```

Not "shard"?

#### CPU usage

For the total CPU uptime, monitor [redpanda_uptime_seconds_total](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_uptime_seconds_total) and [redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total):

```
rate(redpanda_uptime_seconds_total[5m])
rate(redpanda_cpu_busy_seconds_total[5m])
```

#### Memory allocated

To monitor the percentage of memory allocated, use a formula with [redpanda_memory_allocated_memory](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_memory_allocated_memory) and [redpanda_memory_free_memory](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_memory_free_memory):

```
sum(redpanda_memory_allocated_memory) / (sum(redpanda_memory_free_memory) + sum(redpanda_memory_allocated_memory))
```

#### Disk used

To monitor the percentage of disk consumed, use a formula with [redpanda_storage_disk_free_bytes](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_storage_disk_free_bytes) and [redpanda_storage_disk_total_bytes](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_storage_disk_total_bytes): 

```
1 - (sum(redpanda_storage_disk_free_bytes) / sum(redpanda_storage_disk_total_bytes))
```

> Monitor also [redpanda_storage_disk_free_space_alert](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_storage_disk_free_space_alert) for an alert when available disk space is low or degraded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also monitor [redpanda_storage_disk_free_space_alert](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_storage_disk_free_space_alert) for an alert when available disk space is low or degraded.
```

The total throughput of a cluster can be measured by the producer and consumer rates across all topics.

To observe the total producer and consumer rates of a cluster, monitor [redpanda_kafka_request_bytes_total](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_request_bytes_total) with the `produce` and `consume` labels, respectively. 

#### Producer throughput

For the produce rate, create a query to get the produce rate across all topics:

```
sum(rate(redpanda_kafka_request_bytes_total{redpanda_request="produce"} [5m] )) by (redpanda_request)
```

#### Consumer throughput

For the consume rate, create a query to get the total consume rate across all topics:

```
sum(rate(redpanda_kafka_request_bytes_total{redpanda_request="consume"} [5m] )) by (redpanda_request)
```

#### RPC rate

The rate of RPC requests handled should correlate with overall throughput. 

> Any errors (redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out

Reviewer 2: Looks like something is missing here?
Any errors (redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out)

### Latency

Latency should be consistent between produce and fetch sides. It should also be consistent over time. Take periodic snapshots and watch out for significant changes over a short duration.

In Redpanda the latency of produce and fetch requests includes the latency of internal inter-node RPCs that are born from Redpanda's internal implementation using Raft.

#### Kafka consumer latency

To monitor Kafka consumer request latency, use the [redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket) histogram with the label `redpanda_request="consume"`. For example, create a query for the 99th percentile:

```
histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket{redpanda_request="consume"}[5m])) by (le, provider, region, instance, namespace, pod))
```

> The rate of Kafka consumer requests can be monitored with `redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count` with the `redpanda_request="consume"` label:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can monitor the rate of Kafka consumer requests using`redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count` with the `redpanda_request="consume"` label:
```

```
rate(redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count{redpanda_request="consume"}[5m])
```

#### Kafka producer latency

To monitor Kafka producer request latency, use the [redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket) histogram with the `redpanda_request="produce"` label. For example, create a query for the 99th percentile:

```
histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_bucket{redpanda_request="produce"}[5m])) by (le, provider, region, instance, namespace, pod))
```

> The rate of Kafka producer requests can be monitored with `redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count` with the `redpanda_request="produce"` label:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can monitor the rate of Kafka producer requests with `redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count` with the `redpanda_request="produce"` label:
```

```
rate(redpanda_kafka_request_latency_seconds_count{redpanda_request="produce"}[5m])
```

#### Internal RPC latency

To monitor Redpanda internal RPC latency, use the [redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds) histogram. For example, create a query for the 99th percentile latency:   

```
histogram_quantile(0.99, (sum(rate(redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds_bucket[5m])) by (le, provider, region, instance, namespace, pod, redpanda_server)))
```

> The rate of internal RPC requests can be monitored with `redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds_count`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can monitor the rate of internal RPC requests with `redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds_count`:
```

Try to use active voice - better yet: Monitor the rate of internal...

```
rate(redpanda_rpc_request_latency_seconds_count[5m])
```

### Partition health

> The health of Kafka partitions often reflects the health of the broker nodes that host them. Thus, when alerts occur like for under-replicated partitions or more frequent leadership transfers, check for unresponsive or unavailable brokers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The health of Kafka partitions often reflects the health of the broker nodes that host them. Thus, when alerts occur for conditions such as under-replicated partitions or more frequent leadership transfers, check for unresponsive or unavailable brokers.
```

With Redpanda's internal implementation of the Raft consensus protocol, the health of partitions is also reflected in any errors in the internal RPCs exchanged between Raft peers.

#### Leadership changes

> Stable clusters have a consistent balance of leaders across all nodes, with few to no leadership transfers between nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stable clusters have a consistent balance of leaders across all nodes, with few-to-no leadership transfers between nodes.
```

To observe changes in leadership, monitor the [redpanda_raft_leadership_changes](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_raft_leadership_changes) counter. For example, use a query to get the total rate of increase of leadership changes for a cluster:

```
sum(rate(redpanda_raft_leadership_changes{redpanda_cloud_data_cluster_name=<cluster-name>}[5m]))
```
 
#### Under-replicated partitions

A healthy cluster has partition data fully replicated across its brokers. 

An under-replicated partition is at higher risk of data loss. It also adds latency because messages must be replicated before being committed. To know when a partition isn't fully replicated, create an alert for the [redpanda_kafka_under_replicated_replicas](#redpanda_kafka_under_replicated_replicas) gauge when it is greater than zero:

```
redpanda_kafka_under_replicated_replicas > 0
```

> Under replication can be caused by unresponsive brokers. When an alert on `redpanda_kafka_under_replicated_replicas` is triggered, identify the problem broker(s) and examine their log(s). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under-replication can be caused by unresponsive brokers. When an alert on `redpanda_kafka_under_replicated_replicas` is triggered, identify the problem broker(s) and examine their log(s). 
```

#### Leaderless partitions

A healthy cluster has a leader for every partition. 

> A partition without a leader cannot exchange messages with producers or consumers. To know when a partition doesn't have a leader, create an alert for the [redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions) gauge when it is greater than zero: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A partition without a leader cannot exchange messages with producers or consumers. To identify when a partition doesn't have a leader, create an alert for the [redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions) gauge when it is greater than zero: 
```

```
redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions > 0
```

Leaderless partitions can be caused by unresponsive brokers. When an alert on `redpanda_cluster_unavailable_partitions` is triggered, identify the problem broker(s) and examine their log(s). 

#### Raft RPCs

> Redpanda's Raft implementation exchanges periodic status RPCs between a node and its peers. The [redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out) gauge increases when a status RPC times out for a peer, which indicates a peer may be unresponsive and which may lead to problems with partition replication that Raft manages. Monitor for non-zero values of this gauge, and correlate it with any logged errors or changes partition replication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Redpanda's Raft implementation exchanges periodic status RPCs between a node and its peers. The [redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out) gauge increases when a status RPC times out for a peer, which indicates a peer may be unresponsive and may lead to problems with partition replication that Raft manages. Monitor for non-zero values of this gauge, and correlate it with any logged errors or changes partition replication.
```

### Consumers

#### Consumer group lag

> When working with Kafka consumer groups, the consumer group lag&mdash;the difference between the broker's latest (max) offset and the group's last committed offset&mdash;is a performance indicator of how fresh is the data being consumed. While higher lag for archival consumers is expected, high lag for real-time consumers could indicate that the consumers are overloaded and thus may need their topics to be partitioned more, or to spread the load to more consumers.   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When working with Kafka consumer groups, the consumer group lag&mdash;the difference between the broker's latest (max) offset and the group's last committed offset&mdash;is a performance indicator of how fresh the data being consumed is. While higher lag for archival consumers is expected, high lag for real-time consumers could indicate that the consumers are overloaded and thus may need their topics to be partitioned more, or to spread the load to more consumers.   
```

To monitor consumer group lag, create a query with the [redpanda_kafka_max_offset](../../reference/public-metrics-reference#redpanda_kafka_max_offset) and [redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset](redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset) gauges:

```
max by(redpanda_namespace, redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition)(redpanda_kafka_max_offset{redpanda_namespace="kafka"}) - on(redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition) group_right max by(redpanda_group, redpanda_topic, redpanda_partition)(redpanda_kafka_consumer_group_committed_offset)
```

### Services

Monitor the health of specific Redpanda services with the following metrics. 

#### Schema registry

> Schema Registry request latency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schema Registry request latency:
```

```
histogram_quantile(0.99, (sum(rate(redpanda_schema_registry_request_latency_seconds_bucket[5m])) by (le, provider, region, instance, namespace, pod)))
```

> Schema Registry request rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schema Registry request rate:
```

```
rate(redpanda_schema_registry_request_latency_seconds_count[5m]) + sum without(redpanda_status)(rate(redpanda_schema_registry_request_errors_total[5m]))
```

> Schema Registry request error rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schema Registry request error rate:
```

```
rate(redpanda_schema_registry_request_errors_total[5m])
```

#### REST proxy

> REST proxy request latency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REST proxy request latency:
```

```    
histogram_quantile(0.99, (sum(rate(redpanda_rest_proxy_request_latency_seconds_bucket[5m])) by (le, provider, region, instance, namespace, pod)))
```

> REST proxy request rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REST proxy request rate:
```

```
rate(redpanda_rest_proxy_request_latency_seconds_count[5m]) + sum without(redpanda_status)(rate(redpanda_rest_proxy_request_errors_total[5m]))
```

> REST proxy request error rate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
REST proxy request error rate:
```
